nrf_modem: version 1.2.0 (#472)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrfxlib: nrf_modem/doc/gnss_interface.rst

******************************************

To handle events from the GNSS interface, the application needs to implement an event handler function.
This function is then called by the interface whenever there is a new event and possibly associated data available.

.. code-block:: c

   static struct nrf_modem_gnss_pvt_data_frame pvt_data;

   static void gnss_event_handler(int event_id)
   {
       int err;

       /* Process event */
       switch (event_id) {
       case NRF_MODEM_GNSS_EVT_PVT:
           /* Read PVT data */
           err = nrf_modem_gnss_read(&pvt_data, sizeof(pvt_data), NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DATA_PVT);
       ...
   }

The event handler function is set by calling the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_event_handler_set` function.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_event_handler_set(gnss_event_handler);

The event handler is called in interrupt service routine (ISR) context, so processing in the handler should be kept to a minimum.
Data can be read using function :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_read` at any time after receiving the event.
Because there is no buffering for the data, it is overwritten as soon as an event with the same data type is received.

> This is not an issue with PVT data which is updated only once a second, but to receive all NMEA strings, the application needs to read the data inside the event handler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is not an issue with PVT data, which is updated only once a second, but to receive all NMEA strings, the application needs to read the data inside the event handler.
```

Reviewer 2: Ok.

Starting GNSS
*************

GNSS is started by calling the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_start` function.

> After GNSS has been started, the application starts receiving events in the registered event handler function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When GNSS is started, the application starts receiving events in the registered event handler function.
```

Reviewer 2: Ok.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_start();

Stopping GNSS
*************

GNSS is stopped by calling the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_stop` function.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_stop();

Deleting GNSS data stored in NV memory
**************************************

When GNSS is running, it stores information into non-volatile (NV) memory.

> GNSS uses this information when GNSS is restarted and also when GNSS is started after a device reboot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GNSS uses this information when GNSS is restarted and also when GNSS starts after a device reboot.
```

Reviewer 2: Ok.

The default value is 5 degrees.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_elevation_threshold_set(5);

Use case
========

The use case configuration is used to enable use case specific features.
The use case bitmask is set using the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_use_case_set` function.

Start mode
----------

Currently, the only supported start mode is optimized for multiple hot starts.
This is enabled by default and does not need to be set using a function.
However, whenever the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_use_case_set` function is called, the bit :c:data:`NRF_MODEM_GNSS_USE_CASE_MULTIPLE_HOT_START` should be set.

Low accuracy mode
-----------------

If low accuracy mode is enabled, GNSS demonstrates a looser acceptance criterion for a fix.
The error in position calculation, when compared to the actual position, can be larger than in normal accuracy mode.
In addition, GNSS might use only three satellites to determine a fix.
In normal accuracy mode, four or more satellites are used.

For a possible position fix using only three satellites, GNSS must have a reference altitude that has been updated in the last 24 hours.
The reference altitude is obtained from one of the following sources:

> * A GNSS fix using five or more satellites. In the subsequent time window following the fix using five satellites, any fix that uses five or more satellites results in the extension of the 24-hour time window.
> * A-GPS assistance data. The assistance data is injected to GNSS using the :c:type:`nrf_modem_gnss_agps_data_location` A-GPS data location struct, as shown in the example code below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A GNSS fix using five or more satellites. 
   In the subsequent time window following the fix using five satellites, any fix that uses five or more satellites results in the extension of the 24-hour time window.
* A-GPS assistance data.
   The assistance data is injected to GNSS using the :c:type:`nrf_modem_gnss_agps_data_location` A-GPS data location struct, as shown in the example code below:
```

Reviewer 2: Ok.

  .. code-block:: c

     struct nrf_modem_gnss_agps_data_location location;

     location.latitude          = latitude; /* Best estimate within maximum limit of 1800 km. */
     location.longitude         = longitude;/* Best estimate within maximum limit of 1800 km. */
     location.altitude          = altitude; /* Actual altitude of the device in meters. */
     location.unc_semimajor     = 127;      /* Uncertainty, semi-major. Range 0...127 or 255. */
     location.unc_semiminor     = 127;      /* Uncertainty, semi-minor. Range 0...127 or 255. */
     location.orientation_major = 0;        /* Set to 0 if unc_semimajor and unc_semiminor are identical values. */
     location.unc_altitude      = 0;        /* Uncertainty, altitude. Range 0...127 or 255. */
     location.confidence        = 100;      /* Set to 100 for maximum confidence. */

     err = nrf_modem_gnss_agps_write(&location, sizeof(location), NRF_MODEM_GNSS_AGPS_LOCATION);

>  The struct contains the geodetic latitude/longitude (WGS-84 format) and altitude (in meters) parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The struct contains the geodetic latitude, longitude (WGS-84 format), and altitude (in meters) parameters.
```

Reviewer 2: Ok.

>  The uncertainties for the latitude/longitude (unc_semimajor and unc_semiminor) and for the altitude (unc_altitude) are given as an index from ``0`` to ``127``, see :file:`nrf_modem_gnss.h` for the encoding of the uncertainty fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The uncertainties for the latitude, longitude (unc_semimajor and unc_semiminor), and for the altitude (unc_altitude) are given as an index from ``0`` to ``127``, see :file:`nrf_modem_gnss.h` for the encoding of the uncertainty fields.
```

Reviewer 2: Ok.

Dynamics mode can be used to tune GNSS performance for a specific use case.
Using a matching dynamics mode improves the positioning performance.
The dynamics mode can be changed without disruption in positioning.
The selected dynamics mode is stored into the non-volatile memory.

The default value is :c:data:`NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DYNAMICS_GENERAL_PURPOSE`.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_dyn_mode_change(NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DYNAMICS_AUTOMOTIVE);

.. note::

   Dynamics mode is only supported by modem firmware v1.3.0 or later.

1PPS
****

GNSS can provide time synchronized eletrical pulses to the COEX1 pin.
The rising edge of the pulse is aligned as closely as possible to the GPS time second.

The pulse interval and width are configurable.
It is also possible to configure the pulses to start at a specific date and time.
Instead of repeating pulses, 1PPS can also be used in a one-time pulse mode, where only a single pulse is given at the specified time or as soon as GNSS gets a fix.

GNSS only starts giving pulses after it has got at least one fix.
After this, the pulses will continue also when GNSS is no longer running, but the precision will start degrading.

> In cases where GNSS is not running continuously it may be beneficial to change the timing source used by GNSS during sleep periods, see :ref:`sleep_timing_source`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases where GNSS is not running continuously, it may be beneficial to change the timing source used by GNSS during sleep periods, see :ref:`sleep_timing_source`.
```

Reviewer 2: Ok.

Priority mode is disabled automatically after producing the first fix.
It can also be disabled by the application by calling the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_prio_mode_disable` function.

.. note::

   GNSS priority may interfere with LTE operations.
   If possible, it would be good to time the use of priority to moments where data transfer is not anticipated.
   In general, eDRX cycles that are long enough, or PSM, ensure better functionality for both GNSS and LTE.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_prio_mode_enable();

Changing the dynamics mode
**************************

Dynamics mode can be used to tune GNSS performance for a specific use case.
Using a matching dynamics mode improves the positioning performance.
The dynamics mode can be changed without disruption in positioning.
The selected dynamics mode is stored into the non-volatile memory.

The default value is :c:data:`NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DYNAMICS_GENERAL_PURPOSE`.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_dyn_mode_change(NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DYNAMICS_AUTOMOTIVE);

.. note::

   Dynamics mode is only supported by modem firmware v1.3.0 or later.

1PPS
****

> GNSS can provide time synchronized eletrical pulses to the COEX1 pin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GNSS can provide time synchronized electrical pulses to the COEX1 pin.
```

Reviewer 2: Fixed.

even if it's set to a non-zero value.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_fix_interval_set(1);
   ...
   err = nrf_modem_gnss_fix_retry_set(0);

Periodic navigation
-------------------

In periodic navigation mode the fix interval indicates how often GNSS tries to produce a valid PVT estimate. In this mode
GNSS receiver is turned off after each valid PVT estimate, and turned back on periodically after each fix interval has passed.

To enable periodic navigation, the fix interval is set to 10...65535. If the fix retry parameter is non-zero, GNSS will
stop after the fix retry time is up if a valid PVT estimate has not been produced. If the fix retry parameter is
set to zero, GNSS is allowed to run indefinitely until a valid PVT estimate is produced.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_fix_interval_set(600);
   ...
   err = nrf_modem_gnss_fix_retry_set(180);

.. note::

   In periodic navigation mode, when GNSS determines it needs to download ephemerides or almanacs from the broadcast,
   the fix interval and fix retry parameters are temporarily ignored. GNSS will perform scheduled downloads until it

>    has downloaded the data it needs, after which normal operation is resumed.

Reviewer 2: I would keep the next note separate. It's related to periodic navigation mode, but not to this note.

 see nrf_modem_gnss.h for the encoding of the uncertainty fields.

 The altitude uncertainty must be less than 100 meters (index less than ``48``) for it to be valid as a reference altitude. The
 accuracy of the latitude and longitude are less important, but it must be within 1800 kilometers of the actual location if the coordinates
 are given. It is also possible to inject only altitude without known latitude and longitude. In this case unc_semimajor and unc_semiminor
 are set to ``255`` to indicate that latitude and longitude are not valid.

If both verified GNSS fix (five or more satellites used in earlier fix) and A-GPS assistance data are available, then the altitude from the verified GNSS fix is used.

Thus, if GNSS has started in low accuracy mode, it will not be able to produce fixes using three satellites until it has a reference altitude from one of the above-mentioned sources. Furthermore, to continue having possible three satellite fixes, the reference altitude must be updated at least once in every 24 hours from one of the sources.

.. note::

>    Calling function :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_nv_data_delete` with NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DELETE_LAST_GOOD_FIX bit set clears the reference altitude value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Calling the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_nv_data_delete` function with NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DELETE_LAST_GOOD_FIX bit set clears the reference altitude value.
```

.. important::

   The altitude must be accurate to a value within ±10 meters of the actual altitude of the device. An erroneous altitude will result in a severe error in the PVT estimation using three satellites.

If the actual altitude of the device changes with respect to the altitude stored in GNSS (for example, when the device moves around), the accuracy of the position fix using three satellites will be degraded.

> The low accuracy mode is different from the 2D fix that is documented in the NMEA reports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The low accuracy mode is different from the 2D fix in the reporting.
It is documented in the NMEA reports.
```

Reviewer 2: This part is copied from documentation from the old GNSS socket API. Your suggestion isn't exactly right, but that's because the original text is unclear. I need to think how we can rephrase this.

Reviewer 2: Removed that sentence and modified the next one a bit.

In the duty-cycling performance mode duty-cycled tracking is engaged when it can be done without significant performance
degradation. In the duty-cycling power mode duty-cycled tracking is engaged more aggressively with acceptable performance
degradation.

The default value is NRF_MODEM_GNSS_PSM_DISABLED.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_power_mode_set(NRF_MODEM_GNSS_PSM_DUTY_CYCLING_POWER);

Sleep timing source
===================

Timing source used during GNSS sleep periods can be selected between RTC and TCXO. Using TCXO instead of RTC during GNSS
sleep periods might be beneficial when used with 1PPS. When GNSS is not running all the time (periodic navigation or duty-cycling
is used), 1PPS accuracy can be improved by using TCXO. It may also improve sensitivity for periodic navigation when the fix
interval is short.

The default value is NRF_MODEM_GNSS_TIMING_SOURCE_RTC.

.. note::

   Use of TCXO significantly raises the idle current consumption.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_timing_source_set(NRF_MODEM_GNSS_TIMING_SOURCE_TCXO);

.. note::

   This feature is only supported by modem firmware v1.3.0 or later.

QZSS configuration
==================

> GNSS has configuration options which can be used to change QZSS related behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GNSS has configuration options that can be used to change the QZSS-related behavior.
```

.. note::

   QZSS is only supported by modem firmware v1.3.0 or later.

NMEA mode
---------

QZSS NMEA mode controls whether QZSS satellites are reported in NMEA strings or not. NMEA 4.10 standard does not support QZSS
satellites, so in standard NMEA mode QZSS satellites are not reported in GPGSA and GPGSV sentences. In custom NMEA mode satellite
IDs 193...202 are used for QZSS satellites.

The default value is NRF_MODEM_GNSS_QZSS_NMEA_MODE_STANDARD.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_qzss_nmea_mode_set(NRF_MODEM_GNSS_QZSS_NMEA_MODE_CUSTOM);

.. note::

   QZSS is only supported by modem firmware v1.3.0 or later.

PRN mask
--------

> QZSS satellite acquisition and tracking can be configured per satellite using QZSS PRN mask. Bits 0...9 correspond to QZSS PRNs
> 193...202, respectively. When a bit is set, usage of the corresponding QZSS satellite is enabled. Bits 10...15 are reserved and
> their value is ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QZSS satellite acquisition and tracking can be configured for each satellite using QZSS PRN mask.
Bits 0...9 correspond to QZSS PRNs 193...202 respectively.
When a bit is set, using the corresponding QZSS satellite is enabled.
Bits 10...15 are reserved and their value is ignored.
```

> The default is that all QZSS PRNs (193...202) are enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, all QZSS PRNs (193...202) are enabled.
```

QZSS PRNs 193, 194, 195 and 199 can be enabled (and others disabled) as shown in the following example:

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_qzss_prn_mask_set(0x47);

.. note::

   QZSS is only supported by modem firmware v1.3.0 or later.

Enabling GNSS priority mode
***************************

> GNSS can be given priority over LTE idle mode procedures to help getting a fix. Usually this is not necessary when eDRX and/or
> PSM is used, but if that's not possible, the GNSS priority mode may be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GNSS can be given priority over LTE idle mode procedures to help getting a fix.
Usually, this is not necessary when either eDRX or PSM (or both) is used, but if that is not possible, the GNSS priority mode may be used.
```

Priority for GNSS should be used only when fix has been blocked by LTE idle mode operations, which can be detected by
NRF_MODEM_GNSS_PVT_FLAG_NOT_ENOUGH_WINDOW_TIME bit being set in the PVT data frame flags member. The application should not
make the decision based on a single PVT event, but should enable priority only in case this flag has been set in several
consecutive PVT events.

> Priority mode is disabled automatically after producing the first fix. It can also be disabled by the application by calling
> :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_prio_mode_disable` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Priority mode is disabled automatically after producing the first fix.
It can also be disabled by the application by calling the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_prio_mode_disable` function.
```

.. note::

>    GNSS priority may interfere with LTE operations, if possible it would be good to time the use of priority to moments where
>    data transfer is not anticipated. In general, long enough eDRX cycles, or PSM, will ensure better functionality for both
>    GNSS and LTE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   GNSS priority may interfere with LTE operations.
   If possible, it would be good to time the use of priority to moments where data transfer is not anticipated.
   In general, eDRX cycles that are long enough, or PSM, ensure better functionality for both GNSS and LTE.
```

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_prio_mode_enable();

Changing the dynamics mode
**************************

> Dynamics mode can be used to tune GNSS performance for a specific use case. Use of a matching dynamics mode improves the
> positioning performance. Dynamics mode can be changed without disruption in positioning. The selected dynamics mode is stored
> into non-volatile memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamics mode can be used to tune GNSS performance for a specific use case.
Using a matching dynamics mode improves the positioning performance.
The dynamics mode can be changed without disruption in positioning.
The selected dynamics mode is stored into the non-volatile memory.
```

The default value is NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DYNAMICS_GENERAL_PURPOSE.

.. code-block:: c

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_dyn_mode_change(NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DYNAMICS_AUTOMOTIVE);

.. note::

   Dynamics mode is only supported by modem firmware v1.3.0 or later.

1PPS
****

GNSS can provide time synchronized eletrical pulses to the COEX1 pin. The rising edge of the pulse is aligned as closely as
possible to the GPS time second.

> The pulse interval and width are configurable. It's also possible to configure the pulses to start at a specific date and time.
> Instead of repeating pulses 1PPS can also be used in a one-time pulse mode, where only a single pulse is given at the specified
> time or as soon as GNSS gets a fix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pulse interval and width are configurable.
It is also possible to configure the pulses to start at a specific date and time.
Instead of repeating pulses, 1PPS can also be used in a one-time pulse mode, where only a single pulse is given at the specified time or as soon as GNSS gets a fix.
```

GNSS only starts giving pulses after it has got at least one fix. After this, the pulses will continue also when GNSS is no

> longer running, but the precision will start degrading.

Reviewer: New sentence, new line.

.. note::

>    In cases where GNSS is not running continuously it may be beneficial to change the timing source used by GNSS during sleep
>    periods, see Sleep timing source (TODO link?).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In cases where GNSS is not running continuously, it may be beneficial to change the timing source used by GNSS during sleep periods, see Sleep timing source (TODO link?).
```

Reviewer: Also, add the link.

Reviewer 2: Done.

> 1PPS can be enabled or disabled only when GNSS is not running. 1PPS can be enabled with a 1s pulse interval and 100 ms pulse
> width as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1PPS can be enabled or disabled only when GNSS is not running.
1PPS can be enabled with a 1 s pulse interval and 100 ms pulse width as shown in the following example:
```

.. code-block:: c

   struct nrf_modem_gnss_1pps_config config = {
       .pulse_interval = 1,
       .pulse_width = 100,
       .apply_start_time = false
   };

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_1pps_enable(&config);

.. note::

   1PPS is only supported by modem firmware v1.3.0 or later.

A-GPS data
**********

GNSS automatically requests A-GPS data when GNSS is started for the first time or it determines that the existing data is
going to go stale soon. Whenever A-GPS data is needed, GNSS sends the NRF_MODEM_GNSS_EVT_AGPS_REQ event. The payload for
this event contains information about what kind of data is needed.

When the event is received, the associated payload can be read like this:

.. code-block:: c

   struct nrf_modem_gnss_agps_data_frame agps_data;

   err = nrf_modem_gnss_read(&agps_data, sizeof(agps_data), NRF_MODEM_GNSS_DATA_AGPS_REQ);

> After reading data successfully, the struct contains bitmasks sv_mask_ephe and sv_mask_alm, which indicate the need for
> ephemerides and almanacs for each GPS satellite. The data_flags member is a bitmask for other A-GPS data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After reading the data successfully, the struct contains bitmasks sv_mask_ephe and sv_mask_alm, which indicate the need for ephemerides and almanacs for each GPS satellite.
The data_flags member is a bitmask for other A-GPS data.
```

> A-GPS data is injected into GNSS using function :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_agps_write`. Each data type has it's own struct
> which is used when A-GPS data is written to GNSS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A-GPS data is injected into GNSS using the :c:func:`nrf_modem_gnss_agps_write` function.
Each data type has its own struct that is used when A-GPS data is written to GNSS.
```
